Tags

watershed delineation, stream delineation, drainage basin, outlet, pour points, hydrology

Summary

This tool allows a user to delineate watersheds and streams using Digital Elevation Model (DEM) raster(s) and outlet point(s) provided as an input in ArcGIS Pro. The tool is built on ArcPy module, an ESRI Python package to extend the functionalities of ArcGIS products. It is suitable for professionals such as hydrologists, researchers and consultants working on watershed modeling, hydrologic data and civil engineering projects.

Syntax

Input_DEM_Raster

Select a single or multiple Digital Elevation Model (DEM) raster(s) of the geographical area you are interested in. Multiple rasters are automatically joined to create a single raster. DEMs should be located from your local drive and file path should not contain any spaces to avoid error.

A few example DEMs are provided in the data folder for testing purpose. The folder test_1 has a single DEM from an area in Wake County, NC. The folder test_2 has 4 DEMs that geographically align next to each other. test_2 files can be used to test inputting multiple rasters.

More DEMs can be found at USGS's National Map service.

Input_Outlet_points

An outlet, or a pour point, is a point through which the upstream water drains and flows out of the watershed. There are two ways to load outlet point(s):

1. Load a shapefile containing point feature(s) from your local drive. Make sure the file path has no space characters. Ideally, move your shapefile to `data` folder in the `Watershed-Stream-Delineation-Tool` parent folder.

2. Use the pencil tool located next to the drop down button on the geoprocessing pane for this tool. *Note - Outlet(s) should be located near a stream of flow accumulation*

A few example shapefiles are provided in the `data` folder for testing purpose. The folder `test_1` has a shapefile with a single point feature located in Wake County, NC. The folder `test_2` has a shapefile with 3 point features. This can be used with inputting mutliple DEM rasters.


Aggregate_watershed?

If multiple outlets are provided, user has a choice to either join the watersheds pertaining to each outlet or keep them separate.

If checked, this input will aggregate separate smaller watersheds into 1 big watershed. If left unchecked, all the watersheds will be kept separate as their own polygon features.

If only 1 outlet point is provided, this input will not affect the output.  


Outlet_snap_snesitivity

Specify the distance, in map units, within which the outlet point will be snapped to the pixel with the highest flow accumulation. A default value of 50 units is set. Increase the magnitude if you are uncertain about the proximity of your point fetures to a flowing stream.

Stream network sensitivity

Specify the threshold of flow accumulation that makes up a stream. It is the number of pixels that should flow into 1 pixel to determine a raster of branches that represent the extent of a stream network. For instance, a value of 5000 for stream network sensitivity means that any cell in the flow accumulation raster having a value less than 5000 will not be a part of the delineated stream network. In other words, higher the sensitivity value, lower the branching of streams and lower the number of stream order. 